_This project has been created as part of the 42 curriculum by cboucher._

# pipex

## Description

One of my favorite projects so far. We need to simulate bash pipes, meaning we must redirect the output of one command to another. This Pipex and its bonus exercises manage pipes, redirection operators for replacement and appending, as well as here documents.

### Fundamental Concepts

A relatively dense and complex project that requires a good understanding of several system concepts. `pipe` allows us to retrieve two file descriptors (fds) that will serve as temporary storage between multiple processes. Both writing and reading will be single-use. Thus, thanks to `fork`, we learn to create child processes, which are processes generated by a parent process. With `dup2`, we learn to redirect fds instead of those initially intended (usually STDIN and STDOUT). Using `execve`, we can execute our commands. This function replaces all of the child program's code while retaining its fds. With `waitpid`, we can wait for children in the specific parent, and only that one.

I discovered that C natively supports octal bases, which is a practical and conventional way to manage file permission flags for the `open` function, for example.

### Other Concepts Covered

- In a bash session, we can limit the number of processes with `ulimit -u 547`, useful for certain tests.
- In bash, using `echo $?` retrieves the exit code of the last command executed.
- In bash, `command 2> errors.log` allows us to redirect the error output to errors.log, for example.
- For a bash session, using `unset PATH` clears the PATH environment variable and `export PATH="foe"` sets the PATH environment variable to foe.
- The /proc folder contains currently running processes, where we can find the open fds associated with each process.
- `pgrep pipex` retrieves the pid corresponding to the pipex program name.
- `-fsanitize=address` in the compilation rules helps identify memory leaks during program execution without needing to use tools like Valgrind.

## Instructions

### Compilation

Use `make` or `make re` to compile the program. To clean generated files use `make clean` or `make fclean`.
Use `make bonus` to compile the program with bonus exercices.

### Usage

To use the mandatory pipex program, run pipex with at least 4 arguments.

Example : `./pipex infile "ls -lah" "wc -l" outfile` is equivalent to the bash command : `< infile ls -lah | wc -l > outfile`

With the bonus pipex program, you can uses multiples commands.
You can also use a here document and append output to the end of the outfile. For this, start the first argument with here_doc, the second with a limiter of your choice, followed by the commands and the outfile.

Example : `./pipex here_doc EOF "cat -e" "cat -e" outfile` is equivalent to the bash command : `cat -e << EOF | cat -e >> outfile`

## Technical Choices

I was inspired by bash's behavior by testing it multiple times in different ways to better manage my error messages. Previously, my children would write to the error output if the program was not executable or findable, resulting in mixed messages. Now, alongside children, the parent performs an access check to log error messages before displaying them once the children have completed. I went through several different iterations to manage this, including a fork that waits for other children, which is not possible with waitpid, as a child cannot wait for its siblings.

To manage a significant number of children, I open and close my pipes as needed when creating each child.

## Improvement Suggestions

One potential improvement could be to check if a folder (relative or absolute) has the permissions to display "no such file or directory" instead of "command not found."


## Resources

1.	[Article by Roslyn Michelle](https://www.rozmichelle.com/pipes-forks-dups/)
2.	[CodeVault's Youtube playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfqABt5AS4FkW5mOn2Tn9ZZLLDwA3kZUY)
3.	Peer-to-peer learning.
4.	man (umask, pipe, fork, dup2, execve, wait, waitpid)
5.	Web research and AI chat for some notions.

TODO:
8h50 a 11h50 = 3h

VOIR ECOLE : ./pipex a cat "wc -l" c           > (avec permissions 000 a a) wc bad fd : normal ??
VOIR ECOLE : revoir ca ./pipex a yes "head -5" b				SIGPIPE

AJOUTER rubrique README comportements bash avec les autres truc et notamment lexemple de :
env -i ./pipex a cat "wc -l" b     > si PATH n'existe pas ou est vide bash va chercher dans le dossier courant
										cp /usr/bin/ls .
AJOUTER notion : CTRL + D (pas un signal) envoi un fin de fichier (la maniere dont jimplemente gnl ne marche pas du coup car il attend un \0 qui nexiste pas)
AJOUTER notion : env -i command pour remove toutes les variables d'environnements pour la commande qui suit
AJOUTER IMPROVEMENT potentiel : ./pipex here_doc "'eo'f" "cat -e" "cat -e" b  			> LIMITER ne contient pas  2 simples quotes si pas de doubles quotes potentiellement comme dans minishell par rapport a des versions spécifiques de bash (exemple bash de lecole)
AJOUTER IMPROVEMENT potentiel : ne pas use gnl pour ajouter un \n dans le limiter here_doc si on utilise ctrl + v + j, jai choisi de proteger a la place ici le \n
